.TH NIXALARM 5 "2026-07-21" "nixalarm 0.1.0" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
nixalarm \- configuration file for nixalarm
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nixalarm
reads a small TOML-like configuration file. If no file exists, built-in defaults
are written to disk and then loaded.
.PP
The default path is:
.PP
.RS
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nixalarm/config.toml
.RE
.PP
If
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset, the fallback path is:
.PP
.RS
.I $HOME/.config/nixalarm/config.toml
.RE
.PP
The parser supports simple
.I key = value
assignments, quoted strings, integers, floating point numbers, booleans, and
sections. It is intentionally small and does not implement the full TOML
language.
.SH TOP-LEVEL KEYS
.TP
.B alarm_source = "generated"
Default alarm source name.
.TP
.B alarms = ["07:30"]
List of default alarm times used when
.BR nixalarm (1)
is launched without a command line time, such as from a desktop application
menu. Times without
.B AM
or
.B PM
are parsed as 24-hour time. Times with
.B AM
or
.B PM
are parsed as 12-hour time. Use an empty list for clock-only no-argument
launches.
.TP
.B snooze_minutes = 10
Minutes added when Space is tapped while the alarm is ringing.
.TP
.B hold_to_stop_seconds = 10
Seconds Space must be held continuously while ringing to dismiss the alarm.
.TP
.B volume = 0.9
Playback volume from
.B 0.0
to
.BR 1.0 .
.TP
.B source_start_timeout_seconds = 8
FFmpeg read timeout, in seconds, for file and network sources.
.TP
.B fallback_source = "generated"
Source to try when the selected source fails.
.TP
.B use_24_hour = false
Use a 24-hour clock display. The default
.B false
uses 12-hour display. Alarm times on the command line still use 24-hour
.IR HH:MM .
.SH WINDOW SECTION
.SS [window]
.TP
.B width = 800
Initial window width.
.TP
.B height = 360
Initial window height.
.TP
.B fullscreen = false
Start in fullscreen desktop mode.
.TP
.B always_on_top = false
Request an always-on-top window.
.TP
.B flash_hz = 2.0
Flash rate, in hertz, while the alarm is ringing. Set to
.B 0
to disable flashing.
.SH STYLE SECTION
.SS [style]
.TP
.B theme = "terminal_glow"
Select the built-in visual theme. A theme sets both the clock rendering style
and its colors. Set this before any color overrides.
.PP
Supported themes:
.RS
.TP
.B terminal_glow
Seven-segment digits. Dark green background, bright green digits, dim
inactive segments, and glow.
.TP
.B sinnoh_green
Seven-segment digits. Light green pixel-clock style with dark green block
digits and no glow.
.TP
.B nixie
Photoreal nixie-tube digits. Does not use the color overrides below.
.RE
.TP
.B background = "#07180b"
Window background color. Ignored by the
.B nixie
theme.
.TP
.B segment_on = "#6cff57"
Active segment color. Ignored by the
.B nixie
theme.
.TP
.B segment_off = "#123319"
Inactive segment color. Ignored by the
.B nixie
theme.
.TP
.B glow = true
Draw a soft glow behind active segments. Ignored by the
.B nixie
theme.
.TP
.B show_seconds = false
Show seconds in the clock display.
.SH SOURCE SECTIONS
.SS [sources.NAME]
Each source section adds or overrides an audio source named
.IR NAME .
.PP
Supported source types are
.BR generated ,
.BR file ,
.BR internet ,
.BR midi ,
and
.BR sdr_weatherband .
.SS Generated source
.EX
[sources.beep]
type = "generated"
.EE
.SS Local file source
.EX
[sources.local_song]
type = "file"
path = "/home/user/Music/alarm.flac"
.EE
.PP
Files are decoded through FFmpeg. Format support depends on the system FFmpeg
build.
.SS Internet source
.EX
[sources.weather_stream]
type = "internet"
url = "https://wxradio.org/NC-Linville-WNG538"
.EE
.PP
Network streams are decoded through FFmpeg and fall back to
.B fallback_source
when startup or playback fails.
.SS MIDI source
.EX
[sources.midi_alarm]
type = "midi"
path = "/home/user/Music/alarm.mid"
soundfont = "/usr/share/soundfonts/default.sf2"
.EE
.PP
MIDI files are rendered through FluidSynth. If
.B soundfont
is omitted,
.B nixalarm
tries a few common system SoundFont paths. If no SoundFont can be found, the
source fails and the configured fallback source is used.
.SS RTL-SDR weather-band source
.EX
[sources.weather_sdr]
type = "sdr_weatherband"
frequency_mhz = 162.500
device_index = 0
gain = "auto"
.EE
.PP
SDR sources require RTL-SDR hardware and the
.BR rtl_fm (1)
program at runtime.
.SH COMPLETE EXAMPLE
.EX
alarm_source = "generated"
alarms = ["07:30", "5:30 PM"]
snooze_minutes = 10
hold_to_stop_seconds = 10
volume = 0.9
source_start_timeout_seconds = 8
fallback_source = "generated"
use_24_hour = false

[window]
width = 800
height = 360
fullscreen = false
always_on_top = false
flash_hz = 2.0

[style]
theme = "sinnoh_green"
show_seconds = false

[sources.local_song]
type = "file"
path = "/home/user/Music/alarm.flac"

[sources.midi_alarm]
type = "midi"
path = "/home/user/Music/alarm.mid"
soundfont = "/usr/share/soundfonts/default.sf2"

[sources.weather_stream]
type = "internet"
url = "https://wxradio.org/NC-Linville-WNG538"

[sources.black_mountain_weatherband]
type = "sdr_weatherband"
frequency_mhz = 162.500
device_index = 0
gain = "auto"
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nixalarm (1),
.BR rtl_fm (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1)
