.TH NIXALARM 1 "2026-07-21" "nixalarm 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
nixalarm \- graphical Linux alarm clock with configurable audio sources
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nixalarm
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ HH:MM ]
.br
.B nixalarm
.B --test-source
.I NAME
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.br
.B nixalarm
.B --list-sources
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B nixalarm
is a small Linux alarm utility. It displays the current local time in a large
centered seven-segment clock window and rings at the next occurrence of the
requested local
.I HH:MM
time.
.PP
The alarm can play a generated tone, local audio files, internet radio streams,
or optional RTL-SDR weather-band audio through
.BR rtl_fm (1).
Local files and network streams are decoded through FFmpeg.
.PP
Configuration is read from
.BR nixalarm (5).
Command line options override matching configuration values for the current run.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --config " PATH"
Read configuration from
.I PATH
instead of the XDG default.
.TP
.BI --source " NAME"
Use the configured or built-in source named
.I NAME
as the alarm source.
.TP
.B --fullscreen
Start in fullscreen desktop mode.
.TP
.B --windowed
Start windowed, overriding
.B fullscreen = true
from the configuration file.
.TP
.B --list-sources
Print built-in and configured source names, then exit.
.TP
.BI --test-source " NAME"
Play source
.I NAME
immediately instead of scheduling an alarm.
.TP
.B --help
Print command usage, then exit.
.TP
.B --version
Print version, then exit.
.SH TIME FORMAT
.I HH:MM
uses 24-hour local time. If the requested time has already passed today,
.B nixalarm
schedules the alarm for tomorrow.
.PP
If no time is provided,
.B nixalarm
runs as a clock only and does not schedule an alarm.
.PP
The clock display uses 12-hour time by default. Set
.B use_24_hour = true
in
.BR nixalarm (5)
to display 24-hour time.
.SH CONTROLS
.TP
.B Space
While ringing, tap to snooze for the configured snooze period.
.TP
.B Space hold
While ringing, hold continuously for the configured stop duration to dismiss the
alarm.
.TP
.B F11
Toggle fullscreen.
.TP
.B f
Toggle fullscreen.
.TP
.B q
Quit.
.TP
.B Escape
Quit.
.SH BUILT-IN SOURCES
.TP
.B generated
Procedural PCM alarm tone. This is the default and does not require files,
network, or SDR hardware.
.TP
.B nwr_caldwell_internet_backup
Internet-radio backup using the Linville, North Carolina WNG-538 community
mirror when available.
.TP
.B nwr_nc_linville_wng538
Alias for the Linville WNG-538 internet-radio preset.
.TP
.B nwr_caldwell_preferred
Future SDR alias for the preferred Caldwell/Lenoir-area WNG-588 source at
162.500 MHz.
.TP
.B nwr_nc_black_mountain_wng588
RTL-SDR preset for NOAA Weather Radio WNG-588 in the Mount Jefferson/Black
Mountain area at 162.500 MHz.
.TP
.B nwr_nc_mount_jefferson_wng588
Alias for the same WNG-588 RTL-SDR preset.
.TP
.B weatherband_162_400
.TQ
.B weatherband_162_425
.TQ
.B weatherband_162_450
.TQ
.B weatherband_162_475
.TQ
.B weatherband_162_500
.TQ
.B weatherband_162_525
.TQ
.B weatherband_162_550
Generic RTL-SDR weather-band presets.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Run a generated alarm at 7:30 AM:
.EX
nixalarm 07:30
.EE
.TP
Use the Caldwell/Lenoir no-SDR internet backup:
.EX
nixalarm --source nwr_caldwell_internet_backup 07:30
.EE
.TP
Start fullscreen with the configured default source:
.EX
nixalarm --fullscreen 07:30
.EE
.TP
Test the generated alarm source immediately:
.EX
nixalarm --test-source generated
.EE
.SH NOTES
Internet NOAA weather-radio URLs are community mirrors when available. Do not
rely on this program, community internet streams, or general-purpose computer
audio for emergency alerting.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/nixalarm/config.toml
Primary configuration file.
.TP
.I $HOME/.config/nixalarm/config.toml
Fallback configuration file when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nixalarm (5),
.BR rtl_fm (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1)
